# Map stage notes
The following is a set of notes detailing the processing that was applied in the development of each phase of the mapping. This phased approach provides a record of what features were detected and mapped at each stage of the project, where each stage represents the incorporation of new information.

# Stage 4 - v0-4 - 2025-05-30
In stage 3 the focus of the scripts was to merge all the datasets (sediment, automated intertidal rocky reefs, manual reef boundaries) into a final dataset where features don't have any overlaps. My original plan was to use this new output as the basis for further improvements in this stage. However, manual editing of this final dataset is difficult and we determined that there were issues with the clipping around the intertidal rocky reef that should be reprocessed. We therefore shifted to maintaining a set of editable layers that are then combined to create the final dataset. These editable layers are based on the original inputs to the stage 3 scripts, but with some of the corrections applied to them, prior to the next stage of manual editing. The editing layers will remain separate in the order top to bottom:
- Coastline - Coast 50K 2025
- Intertidal rocky reefs - Derived from AU_NESP-MaC-3-17_AIMS_Rocky-reefs
- Reef boundaries - Coral reefs, sand banks and subtidal rocky reefs - Derived from the manual mapping
- Shallow sediment - Derived from AU_NESP-MaC-3-17_AIMS_Shallow-mask
The final dataset is created by each layer above clipping and overriding the layers below.

## Improvements
In this stage we made improvements to the boundary accuracy and separation of Paleo Rocky Reef from Sand Banks in Eighty miles beach. Only the northern most 250 km was improved due to time limitations. Many northern features were previously classified as Paleo Rocky Reefs. These were switched to Sand Banks due to the lack of visual evidence that there was exposed rock.

Many 'High Intertidal Coral Reefs' were reclassified as 'High Intertidal Sediment Reefs' as they had no evidence of a hard substrate. These appear to form a continuum between these two classifications.

A partial reworking of the Barrow Island Shoals and reef areas around Montebello Islands and the Mary Anne Group was done, switching the classification from Coral Reef Inner Flat to Limestone Pavement. This area is not complete. This area was split into the categories 'Limestone Reef' to represent the old limestone reef areas not covered in sand and 'Sandy Limestone Pavement' for the rest of the platform, along with a 'Coral Reef' portion. The whole of the Pilbra needs to be reworked under these classifications, however, only a small amount has been done in this version. More of a proof of concept than a full implementation.

## Rocky reef handling
Version v0-4 is intended to be a draft for the national scale NVCL dataset. This dataset has 250 m pixels and so small intertidal rocky reefs will not contribute much to the result. The intertidal rocky reef mapping needs additional work to get the dataset to work at the national scale accurately. We therefore focus on the NW-Aus-Features dataset focusing on subtidal rocky reef mapping. The intertidal rockys reefs can then be spliced in at the national scale. 

## Shallow sediment
The same applied to the shallow sediment classification. The previous shallow sediment class that was added to version v0-3 was developed for the purpose of assisting the UQ habitat mapping, however its definition does not align accurately with the NVCL. Currently, it includes areas much deeper than the intertidal zone, while the NVCL needs the intertidal zone. We therefore publish v0-4 focusing on the reefs and don't include the shallow sediment. We would therefore defer adding in the intertidal sediment at the national scale (covering the GBR as well).


## Reef boundaries
This layer contains the manually edited reef boundaries from v0-2. This version overlap issues that are corrected by `02-clean-overlaps.py`. We therefore pick this corrected version from `working/02/Reef_Boundaries_Clean.shp` then apply a cross walk of the attributes to bring them inline with the v0-4 classification scheme. The script saves the output to `working/09/Reef-Boundaries_v0-4_edit.shp`, which is then copied manually to `data/v0-4/in/Reef-Boundaries_v0-4_edit.shp` as the shapefile for manual editing and improvement.


## Stage 3 - v0-3_qc-1 - Quality control - 2025-04-24 - Habitat Map boundaries
The goal of this version was to prepare the dataset to be used by the UQ team as contraints on the automated habitat mapping. UQ planned to use coral reefs, rocky reefs and sediment classifications to drive independent habitat classification models. While this version of the dataset contained many improvements over the previous version it still contains many known small issues that were unresolved. This was due to the limited time available to clean up the dataset.

This was the first round of quality control applied to the dataset. The principal editing file for this version is `data/v0-3_qc-1/in/NW-Features_RB_Type_L3/Reef Boundaries Review.shp`. This involved a review of all features by Eric Lawrey, noting missing features, areas that needed trimming, classification changes. These issues were noted in `data/v0-2_merge-maps/Issues-v0-2/Issues-v0-2_partA` and `partB`. The review was split into two parts to allow Rachel to start work on fixing issues, while further review was being conducted. The review was conducted using the project Sentinel 2 composite imagery and individual daily Sentinel 2 imagery using the [Copernicus Browser](https://browser.dataspace.copernicus.eu/). For daily imagery the cloud cover low was set to a low value (~10%) then for the area of interest the remaining images were reviewed over several years. Aerial imagery for part of the Gulf of Carpentaria was also used help identify features. The goal was to identify images that would show a clear view of the feature, or changes over time that would help with type classification. The daily imagery was only used to assist in identifying difficult to classify areas. Approximately 70% of the coastline was reviewed, taking approximately 25 hours. This review only identified and recorded the issues. It did not fix them.

This review identified several key issues with v0-2:
- Large sandy areas (>150 m across) were being included in the rocky reef features. This might degrade the quality of the UQ habitat mapping.
- Many (hundreds) smaller rocky reefs (100 - 200 m across) were identified. The conclusion was that most of these features were intertidal rocky reefs that could be reasonably identified from the Sentinel Low tide composite imagery. This led to the decision to produce semi-automated mapping of intertidal rocky reefs using random forest classification (AU_NESP-MaC-3-17_AIMS_Rocky-reefs).  
- The extent of the coral reefs in the Kimberley were inconsistent in their mapping. For fringing reefs the boundaries focused primarily on the active growth areas of coral, the outer strip of the fringing reef. While for some of the platform reefs the whole reef platform, including the inner, largely sandy, reef flat was being included in the boundary. In the Kimberley, the fringing reefs grow out laterally from the land and islands, leaving an extensive reef flat devoid of corals, consisting mostly of sand. These are however limestone reef frameworks, which we can verify from the presence of the occasional 'blue hole' formed by the limestone reef frameworks dissolving from rain water during a previous glacial period when sea levels were lower. From a geomorphic perspective the whole reef framework should be included in the reef boundary; however,  from a biodiversity hotspot perspective we might be more interested in where there is active coral growth. To cover both bases we added a new classifcation 'Reef Flat Shallow'. This will cover the low diversity shallow portions of reefs that would have been excluded. This new classification was used extensively to describe the extensive reef areas around Barrow Island in Western Australia. In this version the Kimberley fringing reefs were not adjusted to this new approach due to limited time.
- The review identified a number of fish traps and oyster reefs that are relevant for [NESP MaC Project 4.13](https://catalogue.eatlas.org.au/geonetwork/srv/eng/catalog.search#/metadata/8050d5a5-6d8d-4dc5-ae18-9805fd401032).
- An issue was identified at a rate of about one issue per four mapped features. In general these adjustments were generally adjustments to the boundary shape, generally requesting tighter mapping of the feature, rather than missing features or classification errors.

After the review Rachel worked on improving the high priority issues, resolving approximately 40% of them, the bulk of which was trimming out sediment areas from rocky reefs. 

Rachel then handed over the editing to Eric who then continued to make priority improvements. Overall only approximately 60% of the priority issues were resolved due to limited time. 

### New reef classification scheme - Names and attributes
Some of the reefs near Montebello Island are potentially rocky in nature, however they have a biogenic carbonate origin, which could not be represented with the existing RB_Type_L3 classification scheme as all rocky reefs are assumed to be Terrigenous. To add a carbonate to rocky reefs would require potentially doubling of the rocky reef classification types. The RB_Type_L3 was intended to have a discrete named classification for every combination of attributes that are in use. This works up to a point. As more details are recorded about a reef, not all of this can be represented as a single classification name. This triggered a reassessment of the existing classification scheme. 

The goal was to develop a hybrid classification scheme that uses both a named classification and attributes. The named classification would capture all types that would be expected to put in a legend, i.e. feature names that an environmental manager is likely to care about and qualifier attributes would capture any additional information. For this the relative position (Fringing, Platform), was moved into its own attribute. 

The new classification was automatically applied to the existing mapping using `03-class-cross-walk.py`. 

Note: v0-3 contained a first cut at adjusting the classification to make it more flexible. This was triggered by trying to classify the shallow areas around Barrow Island. We determined that the exposed hard substrate areas are rocky in nature, but limestone in origin, rather than normal terrestial origin. This triggered the reshuffle of the classifications. The long-term coral community monitoring program results (Bancroft, 2011) showed that all the sites in this region had high levels of hard corals. This led to the false view that there was more coral than would have been expected. This nudging us to simply consider these limestone reefs as coral reefs. After publishing v0-3 we discovered Bancroft, 2009, which included a much more diverse range of locations. This highlighted that the monitoring sites were spatially biases to locations of high coral cover and diversity. The reality was that most of the limestone reefs were very low in coral cover and mostly covered in sparse macroalgae. What we had called 'Coral Reef Inner Flat' was actually limestone pavement with a sandy veneer. So in v0-4 we added classifications for limestone reefs and limestone pavement with sand veneer to capture this nuance and these areas were reclassified.

v0-4 revisited the classification with a full analysis of ensure the classification information can be used to crosswalk to the Natural Values Common Language and the Seamap Australia Classification scheme.

Bancroft, K. (2009). Establishing long-term coral community monitoring sites in the Montebello/Barrow Islands marine protected areas: Data collected in December 2006 (No. MSPDR4; Marine Science Program Data Report Series, p. 68). Marine Science Program Science Division Department of Environment and Conservation.

Bancroft, K. (2011). Establishing long-term coral community monitoring sites in the Montebello/Barrow Islands marine protected areas: Site descriptions and summary analysis of baseline data collected in December 2006. Marine Science Program Data Report MSPDR9 (No. MSPDR9; Marine Science Program Data Report Series, p. 91). Marine Science Program, Science Division Department of Environment and Conservation. https://library.dbca.wa.gov.au/static/Journals/080598/080598-09.pdf



### What to do with Montebello / Barrow Island reefs
There are extensive shallow reef areas around Montebello and Barrow Islands. These areas are each approximately 550 km2 each. Rachel had initially mapped them as rocky reefs with a few small patch coral reefs in areas where there was obvious coral reef accretion. This seemed to provide the wrong impression of the region.  

Research indicated that whole shallow plateau around the island is carbonate in origin. Coral monitoring sites showed that sites that did not look like a traditional coral reef in structure as they had a rocky foundation with a low structural complexity, but still high levels of hard and soft coral cover. While many of the reef structures look rocky, they are covered in hard coral and thus should be considered as coral reefs. The large flat areas were converted to 'Reef Flat Shallow' to indicate that these areas are geomorphically related to and connected with the coral reef stuctures. 

Note: This was later adjusted in v0-4 because these monitoring sites were biased to sites with high coral cover.

### Reviewing the classification of offshore reefs
The classification of offshore reefs was review and corrected. Reefs were assigned as part of an atoll if the water around the reef was more than 200 m in depth. In some parts there were clusters of reefs near the 200 m contour. Given the uncertainty in the bathymetry dataset (Geoscience Australia AusBathy 250m 2024), only reefs that were significantly separated from clusters at the shelf edge were classified as atolls. 

Those with atolls were classified as atoll platforms. Where a reef (hard exposed reef) existed on these platforms then they were cut out from the atoll and classified based on the same process as for Coral Sea. 

The equivalent deep areas for reefs on the continental shelf were classified as Deep Platform Coral Reefs and the shallow portions as Platform Coral Reefs. Some of the Deep Platforms were actually just above the 30 m threshold and so these will still need some more work to treat the oceanic reefs and shelf reefs in a consistent manner.

### Cleaning up for publication.
To get the dataset ready for publication and use by UQ for the habitat mapping the following processing was done on the dataset:
1. Removing geometry errors created by manual editing. The `Vector / Geometry Tools / Check Geometry` tool in QGIS was used to find any issues. These were then fixed manually.
2. Removed overlaps in High Intertidal Coral Reefs with other features. (`02-clean-overlaps.py`)
3. We apply the new classification scheme (`03-class-cross-walk.py`).
4. Merge in the semi-automated intertidal rocky reef mapping. (`04-v0-4-merge-rocky-reefs.py`)
5. We remove overlaps between the rocky reef features and the coral reefs (`05-clip-rocks-from-reefs.py`)
6. We use the semi-automated shallow mask to create an estimate for the shallow sediment areas. We first clean up this dataset by adding areas that were not mapped correctly (seagrass areas, and shallow foreshore in GOC) and removing spurious results, particularing narrow rivers.
7. We estimate the sediment areas by clipping reefs from the shallow mask, leaving just soft sediment (providing the rocky reef and coral reef mapping is accurate).
8. We clean up the land edge of the shapefile by clipping against the land mask.

## Stage 2 - v0-2_merge-maps - Combining the reefs maps together
To improve the detection rate for small and hard to detect reefs in this stage Rachel combined the two reef maps (Reef-Features_Ref1_RB and Rough-reef-mask_Ref2_EL) by identifying features in the Rough-reef-mask_Ref2_EL that were missing in her mapping. The missing reefs were typically remapped from the satellite imagery rather than copying them from the Rough-reef-mask_Ref2_EL because the rough reef map features were typically too coarse in detail.

## Stage 1 - v0-1_dual-maps - Two independent mappings from satellite imagery
This stage involved manual digitisation of reefs predominantly from Sentinel 2 imagery, although some additional high resolution image sources were used for Reef-Features_Ref1_RB. This phase includes mapping of the reefs by two relatively independent cartographers. 
1. Reef-Features_Ref1_RB: Mapped by Rachel Bycroft. Full resolution reef mapping with the core focus on mapping coral reefs and rocky reefs, with sand banks as a lower priority. No intertidal sediment was mapped. This dataset is the base of the final dataset. The target for digitisation was 1:150k-250k scale with a maximum spatial error of 75 - 150 m. Features were mapped using the clustering rules developed for the Coral Sea Features mapping (approximately: features of the same type closer than 200 m are merged, sand between features is included, sand on the outside is included up to 50 m). Features were mapped and assigned as per the Reef Boundary Type classification (RB_Type_3). Complex areas were split based on types so that a coral reef growing outwards from a rocky reef would be mapped as two areas joined together. This mapping took approximately 450 hours.
2. Rough-reef-mask_Ref2_EL: Mapped by Eric Lawrey. Half resolution mapping, with no type classification, but with intertidal areas included. This dataset started out as the rough reef masking to developing a semi-automated approach for mapping reefs and the intertidal zone (Lawrey, 2025). This mapping was extended to more comprehensively map reef boundaries, including small reefs, to act as a cross reference check for the Reef-Features_Ref1 dataset. It could be used to identify reefs that were missed in the primary reef mapping, helping to determine detection rate for each cartographer. The reef features were mapping at a rapid pace, with an average of 40 sec per feature. The target maximum boundary error was 250 m, however little care was taken to make the mapped boundaries smooth. The goal of this mapping was to mask out an shallow area, regardless of the benthic type.


## TODO: Stage X - v0-X_merge-bathy - Check bathymetry and marine charts for reefs we missed
In this stage information from bathymetry sources was incorporated into the mapping. The AHO Marine Charts (Australian Hydrographic Office, 2021a, 2021b) and bathymetry datasets were reviewed to identify any reef features that were missed in the previous stages. For Marine Charts peaks and reefs identified in the charts were compared with the mapped reef boundaries. On the marine charts shallows reefs are marked as a hazard or as a peak, showing a depth sounding, with a contour around the peak.

Potential reefs identified from the bathymetry were reviewed in the satellite imagery. In general only potential reefs that could be confirmed visually from the satellite imagery added to the reef dataset. Where no confirmation imagery was found, the potential reef was recorded in a separate point dataset. These were used to help identify the number of potential reefs that were missed by the reef mapping. Features idenified only in the bathymetry were not included by default because the available bathymetry is highly variable in quality. Not all peaks in the bathymetry dataset are reefs. In some cases they appear as a peak due to the large spacing between the depth soundings. Reefs were only included directly from the bathymetry where there was good evidence that the source bathymetry was a high quality representation of the true bathymetry.

In this stage we also identified AHO marine chart depth soundings that did closely align with mapped reef centroids. These depths were recorded in the dataset and later used to calibrate and validate the depth classification of reefs.

In this stage we also identified whether the mapped reef feature corresponded to a reef feature that was already known about. For this we consider a reef to have already been known about if it appears as a distinct feature in the marine charts, or bathymetry, or part of ReefKIM (Kordi, et.al., 2016), Big Bank Shoals, or AIMS north west shoal benthic surveys.